hi this is pressure Locker last week the
ted-ed YouTube channel presented the
Frog riddle which is a variation of a
classic probability problem however in
telling the story they included a slight
detail which would actually change the
calculation in this video I'm going to
present what I consider to be the
correct calculation I'm going to go over
a simplified version of the riddle with
pertinent details I'm going to explain
how it relates to a classic probability
problem and one of its variations and
I'm going to show why the ted-ed video
actually meant to do one calculation but
they presented a story for another
calculation so here's the riddle imagine
you have a population of frogs that are
equally likely to be male and female and
you cannot visually tell the difference
between the genders you see two frogs
what is the probability there is a
female in the pair of frogs under two
different circumstances circumstance a
the pair of frog contains a male frog
this is the calculation the ted-ed video
wanted to present what the story
actually presented was variation B the
pair contains a male frog because you
heard a croak that you know is
distinctive to male frogs it might seem
to you that variations a and B are going
to be the same in either case you know
there's one male frog in the pair but
the detail that you heard the croak of
the Frog actually changes the
probability so in order to explain why
I'm going to go over the classic
probability problem that this is based
on the boy or girl paradox imagine mr.
Jones has two children's you want to
know the probability that he has one
girl under two different variations
variation a he has a boy variation B he
has a boy born on Tuesday it seems like
these two variations would have the same
probability but let's go over the couch
to see why it's actually different in a
and B so variation a let's consider mr.
Jones having two children what's the
sample space we know that he could have
two boys we know he could have a boy and
a girl he could have a girl and a boy or
he could have two girls these are four
events
and they're equally likely to happen if
we assume the probability of having a
boy and a girl is equal if we know that
he has a boy the event that he has two
girls is not possible so we have a new
sample space in which there are three
different events he has two boys a boy
and a girl or a girl and a boy and these
are equally likely events what is the
probability that he has a girl in this
new sample space the events boy girl and
girl boy are equally likely there are
two events in which he has a girl out of
three therefore the probability he has a
girl if we know he has a boy is equal to
two thirds now let's consider the other
variation what would happen if we know
he has a boy that's born on a Tuesday
now this seems like it shouldn't affect
the calculation knowing he has a boy
obviously the boy would have to be born
on some day of the week so whether he's
born on Tuesday or any other day
shouldn't matter however the fact we
learned that the boy is born on a
Tuesday does change our sample space so
we know there are only three possible
pairs of genders it could either be boy
boy boy girl or girl boy he can't have
two girls because we know that he has a
boy we also know that the boy is born on
a Tuesday so let's indicate the days of
the week by a numerical code zero
equaling Sunday one equaling Monday and
Counting up all the way until six
equaling Saturday will write the day of
the week that a child is born using a
subscript so what is our sample space
now for boys that are boys and girls
that are born
different days of the week we need to
define the events that are equally
likely to happen if he has two boys it's
possible that the first child was born
on a Tuesday and the second child was
equally likely to be born on any of the
other Ani of the seven days of the week
it could also be that the older child is
born on a Tuesday and the the other
child is born on any of the days of the
week equally likely to happen if he has
a boy girl we know the boy has to be
born on a Tuesday and the girl can be
born on any days of the week and
similarly for our last case there's one
thing to consider here actually we've
written down B 2 B 2 twice we need to
remove this so that we're only
considering you with equally likely
events we now have a list of 27 equally
likely events in our sample space out of
these seven plus seven involve mr. Jones
having a girl therefore we can calculate
the probability has a girl is 14 divided
by 27 which is approximately 52% and
this is closer to our intuition that
when he has two children
we suspect that it's equally likely
knowing that one is a boy that the other
could be a girl is almost 50% so now
let's relate that to the ted-ed frog
riddle the video presented the
calculation for variation a however they
actually present to the story of
variation B and that's going to be
similar to the boy or girl paradox
knowing that the boy was born on a
Tuesday so let's go through this
calculation we know that if we have two
frogs they can either be male male male
female female male or female female if
we know that there is a male frog in the
pair we remove the female female pair
and we end up with a new sample space of
three equally likely events male male
male female and female male
in two of these events there is a female
so we can calculate the probability
there's a female is equal to 2/3 now
this is the probability that's presented
in the ted-ed video and it would be true
if you knew that in a pair of frogs
there is a male frog you learn that by
random chance
however the ted-ed video presented the
variation that you know that there's a
male frog because you heard a croak so
now we have to specify a sample space
that involves the male frogs croaking we
know that there are three different
gender pairs that are possible male male
male female or female male let's
indicate a subscript of one if we know
that the frog croaks and zero if the
Frog does not croak we have to consider
the sample space of equally likely
events it could be that the first male
frog croaked in a male-male pair it
could be that the second male frog
croaked in the male-male pair or in the
male and female pairs we would have that
the male frog is croaking the video
doesn't tell us actually anything about
the probability that male and female
frogs are croaking so we're going to
assume that these are all equally likely
events the reason we have two different
pairs of male male frogs here is that
either frog could be croaking so if we
consider this sample space of equally
likely events the probability that we
have a female there are two different
events out of four so that means the
probability is equal to 2/4 which is 1/2
so summarizing the ted-ed frog video
actually present they wanted to do a
calculation for variation a what's the
probability that there's a female if you
know that the pair contains a male frog
this would be a probability of 2/3 what
they actually presented was the
variation where you know there's a mail
fraud because you heard a croak that's
distinctive to male frogs in that case
the probability
becomes one-half and intuitively hearing
the male curl changes a sample space
your two times more likely to hear a
male croak from a male-male pair than
from a female male or a male-female pair
so I would suggest the ted-ed frog video
as presented should have a probability
of 1/2
I understand they wanted to present
variation a now the key in variation a
is that you hear this information by
random chance now that's actually pretty
hard to do in practice as you can see
that's where they stumbled in the video
and made the mistake they included the
detail you have to learn it somehow in
practice so very very often in practice
you're most likely going to be presented
with variation B and that is going to be
a probability of 1/2 thanks for watching
this video please subscribe to my
channel I make videos on math and game
theory you can catch me on my blog mind
your decisions which you can follow on
Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch her on social media app press
Locker and if you like the video please
check out my books I've written many
books about probability and game theory
and similar topics there are links in
the video description